well welcome back
what a terrific poster session that was
incredibly energetic one comment I
wanted to make although we don't have
lots of people standing in the back we
do have a bunch of seats up front over
here they're marked reserved it's mostly
for the award ceremony later anybody can
sit in any seat whether it's marked
reserved or not it's fine so if people
don't want to stand in back feel free to
come down well in organizing this year's
symposium you might notice in the upper
right of this slide that we keep showing
is the number 30 and the reason for that
is that we are ending the year now which
is a commemorative year for NHGRI it's
our 30th anniversary as an organization
for those you may not know the full
history the Institute first existed as
an office coming into being in 1989 thus
the 30 year anniversary
the reason the office was created was
because the notion of launching the
human genome project was very much on
everybody's mind in fact it was being
ready to be launched so that by 1990
when the human genome project was
launched we moved from being an office
to being a center the National Center
for Human Genome Research and then later
eventually became an institute and so in
thinking about those suppose we wanted
this year's theme to be sort of a bit
celebratory commemorative about the 30th
anniversary and so it was part of the
reason we wanted to have not one but two
featured keynote presenters and in each
case I thought about who to get and to
invite and I wanted to make sure that
each would in their own way provide some
historic context for NHGRI for the field
of genomics and genetics and for sort of
a look back maybe the 30 years or even
beyond to contextualize our
commemoration of our 30th anniversary so
we're truly honored to have as our first
keynote presenter a truly gifted
physician researcher award-winning
author educator and a friend of NHGRI as
dr. Sidman Croce now Sid was born and
raised in New Delhi India he later
travelled to the United States where in
1993 he received a BS in biology from
Stanford University he then studied as a
Rhodes Scholar at Oxford completing the
D fell in immunology in 1996 before
returning to the United States
to attend medical school at Harvard
University after earning his MD and mm
it trained in internal medicine oncology
as a fellow at Boston's Dana Farber
Cancer Institute and the Massachusetts
General Hospital and then in 2009 he
joined the faculty of the department of
medicine in the division of hematology
oncology at Columbia University Medical
Center where he has worked up to the
present time Sid is a talented
oncologist he's a first-rate researcher
having a research program that really
covers the full spectrum from very basic
cancer biology to translational efforts
and designing new cancer treatments but
beyond his excellence as an oncologist
and a cancer researcher Sid excels at
educating the public about science and
medicine and oh boy has he been
amazingly productive in this role so Sid
is now well known and highly respected
for his books for example the Emperor of
all maladies a biography of cancer which
earned him the 2011 Pulitzer Prize
followed by you know the gene an
intimate history which won him
international awards and was recognized
by the Washington Post and The New York
Times as one of the most influential
books of 2016 these published works
exhibits its outstanding literary skills
but furthermore the Emperor of all
maladies has been adapted into a
documentary by filmmaker Ken Burns and
was included among Time Magazine's 100
best non-fiction books of the past
century now here's the twist what most
of you probably don't yet know is that
NHGRI has developed a partnership with
Weta the DC region's flagship PBS
station related to their development of
a new Ken Burns produced documentary
based on SIDS 2016 book the gene and
intimate history the for our film will
showcase the history of genetics and
genomics with the nationwide airing
across the PBS network scheduled for
April of 2020 in partnership with NHGRI
WETA is developing an extensive
educational and public engagement
campaign associated with the film's
release expanding opportunities for
educators and students to learn about
genetics and genomics and for
communities the media academics of
opinion leaders and and others and
really offers the ability to engage all
people in discussions about how advances
in these rapidly expanding fields really
are going to affect medicine healthcare
science and public policy so it is
therefore very timely to have us have
CID join us for this year's symposium to
help us celebrate our 30th anniversary
as an organization and to tell us more
about his remarkable journey as a
clinician scientist author and science
educator all with an eye towards the
April 2020
of the PBS film on his latest book the
gene something that is obviously of
great interest to NHGRI so please join
me in welcoming Sid monk Ricci to the
podium
[Applause]
thank you sir real honor and a pleasure
to be here I have a little treat to
start us off which is that I was able to
convince Ken Burns and Barrett Goodman
to have a clip from the film a
pre-release script from the film which
only you can see which never been shown
before but I should say that it's a it's
an astonishing clip because it follows
the journey of a patient being treated
with what might should be described as
genetic medicine so in other words a
diagnosis this is a child with a rare
genetic condition and is treated
basically with a medicine that
fundamentally involves genes and
genomics I don't know if you've seen if
you witnessed a child with spinal
muscular atrophy being treated with one
of the new drugs it is it's hard to
describe there's a famous there's a
famous saying in science or often
attributed to Isaac Asimov that when a
technology becomes sufficiently complex
it becomes indistinguishable from magic
what is happening to these children is
nothing short of magical it is not the
case with many diseases so I don't want
to create kind of a false optimism but I
wanted to show you this clip as just a
big it's a short clip as a beginning to
the talk so why don't we roll the video
you
jace got his first dose of the
experimental treatment called new
sanderson through an infusion into his
spinal fluid when he was just 18 days
old
we were on a journey it was kind of like
miracle or bust you know we're gonna
have a miracle or we're just going to
lose him our hope was that maybe our
baby would be able to at least sit or
eat normal food or maybe he would walk
even as time goes on and Jace begins to
do things that Ariel didn't there's this
new hope like hey or it looks like we're
going to get to raise him we were at
some friends house for the evening and I
set Jace down on the floor Eddie there
and Jace just took a couple steps and it
was like oh my goodness he's doing it
like that's more than he's ever done
before Jace was just going back and
forth between us and we kept backing up
and he would go further home to Daddy
you're doing so good
[Music]
everyone that was there was standing
around cheering and it was awesome
[Music]
wonderful and then on our way home it
was just quiet and we were all just kind
of like this really happened Jase
recently celebrated his third birthday
unaware that he is a medical pioneer who
represents the promise of a genomic
revolution decades in the making
[Music]
he and two dozen other pre-symptomatic
children in the trial are all doing well
they need spinal infusions of the drug
every few months so without them they
would almost certainly no longer be
alive there's just times in this journey
where the full seriousness of it hits us
and we're like we're looking at
something and we're holding a person who
like earth has never seen anything like
this before
this has not been possible this is
amazing and yet it's also really normal
I'm a dreamer I mean he's just my little
son so I'm just taking these moments for
what they are and love and love and in
love in life loving the season of life
that we're in
[Music]
I take each moment where there has been
a dramatic success doesn't just enliven
the people who are working on that
disease it has a ripples across the
field it's one more reason to believe
that those decades of really hard
slogging are finally beginning to yield
up some really remarkable events and
that makes everybody interested in
working harder and probably recruits new
people into the field who maybe we're
holding back for fear that this wasn't
ready yet
it seems to be ready now
[Applause]
so that's a lovely thing to see I want
to give a half-an-hour talk about the
span of history that we've come through
I'll talk a little bit about cancer
because of course that is where I
specialize but I'll focus mostly on on
on genes and and and how I began to
think about this this field the the talk
is divided into interest in this into
five parts but these parts really signal
sort of seminal transitions in in in our
history and understanding of what is it
what are these units that comprise us
how do these units interact to produce
us and how do they interact with the
environment with chance with triggers
and with choices and exposures to create
this final complex being called you but
the first thing we probably need to work
emphasize is that even early on even
before the word gene was existed the
seductive quality of human heredity had
captured generations of people this is a
G Wells saying that heredity somehow
means more to us than virtually any
science because we think of it as as
something that that is essential to us
that perception of essentiality has
remained and actually has amplified and
I'll end a lot of this talk about about
why that perception remains today and
what the problems of such a perception
can can cause what what dilemma is that
can bring us but right in ancient times
the idea of what was heritable this is
the idea or this is the idea of the of a
child being buried a homunculus being
buried inside a sperm this is how people
thought that heredity was passed along
here is a document very early on where
you see the word gene of course this is
not the word gene as we understand it
today this is the word gene from
genealogy
and this is a genealogical tree and very
very early on as I said there were
questions about what genes were how you
could how you could imagine manipulating
them and potentially potentially
changing them and even Darwin didn't use
the word even though of course we now
have a full understanding that you
cannot think about evolution molecular
evolution and natural selection without
thinking about genetics but the word
didn't exist
even the concept didn't exist until
something happened in a small monastery
I don't know how many people have been
at this Institute to Bruno so five four
okay it's not unusual it's a strange
place to go to because it's a you know
it's now it wasn't then it was it's a
now it's a kind of a small road mark or
a small town between two big towns
between Vienna and Prague will you get
off the train station and there is a
small Eastern European town and down
there's a hill and down the hill in a
very kind of nondescript place comes the
birthplace of I think this Institute
comes the birthplace of all of our your
work I would imagine and that's this
monastery this is this is the monastery
where Mendel worked this here this
window is Mendel's window and this
little plot over here which bizarrely is
growing gardenias and not peas I don't
know why is where Mendel began his first
experiments and as you very well know
these experiments were astonishing
even though Mendel didn't used the word
gene even Mendel himself reduce our gene
he used the word something like toward
units but essentially made the a
fundamental change in the way heredity
was conceived and the fundamental change
as you all know was that Mendel began to
describe the idea that heredity is
carried in a form that no one had
imagined before people had a mad
that hereditary information was carried
by blending that your mother's
hereditary information and your father's
ready information would sort of go into
a wearing blender and out would pop you
with you know a mixture of the traits
Mendel describes something that was
profoundly counterintuitive at that time
he argued that in fact this mixture of
traits that we see in the world is
actually pixelated that were missing is
that that in fact what is really
happening during hereditary transmission
is single traits or single particles
again he didn't use the word gene he
used other he used terms that resemble
particle units were transmitted from
parent to offspring via sperm and egg
and these remained unbroken constant
across generations and what you were
seeing was a misperception we're seeing
an aggregate of the this and that was
what was forming and one organism it's
difficult to emphasize how radical the
idea was and how how ignored the idea
was he gave his main talk Mendel
basically wrote one paper which is a
it's a good reminder to people that you
know if you do a PhD thesis you and you
write one paper it's perfectly fine if
it's of that quality so Mendel basically
wrote one paper in his lifetime you know
other things about apples and
cultivation but one major scientific
paper in his lifetime and the the some
water park apocryphal story was that it
was mentioned four times before the word
gene was coined so in other words in
about 30 years after Mendel's death it
was mentioned four times and it was read
out to an audience of about 50 or 60
agricultural workers in Bruno so if
you're doing a PhD and you're you find
that people are dosing off in the
audience you'll be ok as well as long as
you write this kind of paper the idea is
that of course the word the genes were
rediscovered this is Hugo de Vries corns
and sure Mac and they really
independently working on plants and
other species began to read ascribe the
idea thirty years after Mendel that in
fact there were these units of
heredity that were moving across
generations and that they were unitary
in a fundamental way and very soon it
became clear that these units were not
just abstractions this is Archibald
Garrod and English pathologists who
began to who's one of the first to begin
to say well these units you know you
find there they're moving across plants
and animals and peas and etc etc but
they have consequences for humans and
they have consequences for human disease
and he wrote an extraordinary a book
which was later edited readapted but was
called Garrett's inborn errors of
metabolism and these inborn errors of
metabolism one of which is shown in this
this this picture over here with a lady
with an unusual condition these inborn
errors of metabolism Garrett
hypothesized what were because genes
were functioning abnormally and that
genes were functioning abnormally in and
again an astonishing idea first and
because they were not producing
something they were not produced they
were not converting one chemical to
another chemical you can already see the
idea that the whole functionality of
what we know as modern the the great
synthesis of of modern biology modern
genetics was present in its incipient
form in this idea that that and Garrett
hypothesized in these books that these
inborn errors of metabolism was because
genes functioned abnormally and they
weren't able to convert something into
something else a chemical a precursor
chemical into a product chemical and of
course this would be later vastly
modified and refined now while this was
going on it's also important to realize
that a second parallel strand and this
is a strand that I talked about
extensively in my book was also
happening this strand was the strand of
genetic determinism and of trying to
control human heredity using social and
political means and it's if there's a
central point to this talk it is that
these two strand the science of genetics
and the desire to
kool-aid jeans has always gone hand in
hand and have gone hand in hand because
we ascribe and continue to ascribe a
special status to heredity a special
status to the genome a status that is
really not given to any other kind of
information we don't give this status
for instance to the exposures that you
have in your life to the chances that
you have in your life through your for
instance socioeconomic status but
something about genes something about
genes seduces us attracts us confuses us
and bewilders us and wants us want to
change them if we can to make people
better to make our children better and
this is not a new idea it's a very old
idea and if there is anything if we want
to navigate and this is where we will
end today in this talk if we want to
navigate the space today which we have
to to figure out whether we're going to
change genetics human genetics forever
or you know in an individual where
they're going whether we're going to
select certain kinds of children to
implant or not implant into our wombs we
have to know the beginnings of the story
and we have to understand the seductions
of this gene or of the genome that it is
something that we have considered right
from the beginning of time from
Aristotle's times as something that is
essential to us private to us personal
to us and therefore something that has
special status and is therefore very
particular these are some pictures this
is a rather benign looking picture but
has a very macabre history this is a
Nazi geneticist measuring to measuring
twins the Nazi genetic project one of
the aspects of the Nazi genetic project
was to document which aspects of human
traits were hereditary in which aspects
were not height was obviously one of
them but there were many many things
that they measured using potential and
progressively macabre experiments this
is another picture to the fascinating
picture I found this in the archives
this is Nazi students you can see their
swastikas being taught a genetic table
men of Mendel's table so it was not
referral to the education of the of
these new recruits it was central to
their education they were very much
taught this and lest you and lest you
believe that this was a Nazi only
project that is not true in fact the
Americans had their own version a Yankee
version of the of this project this is a
better baby's contexts where the best
babies are selected this is a page from
a journal which was explicitly called
eugenics later became actually an
American Journal of Human Genetics so we
went through a transformation and the
story that begins my my book is the
story of Carrie buck and Emma buck
mother and daughter and both were
classified as being morons in other
words having low intellectual or
cognitive capacity based on
extraordinarily poor poor testing and
Carrie buck was sterilized to prevent
any the birth of further children
and this is the history that that
precedes simultaneously as we celebrate
the the Institute and its and its
progress simultaneously as we celebrate
that child who was able to walk who is
not able to walk before we have to
remember that there is a flip side to
this story and that is that is the point
of this of this talk will go through the
the middle of this talk this will be
familiar territory to you much of this
work was or some of this work was done
here in laboratories around here the
question then became once these
particles of inheritance genes had been
described they had been named they'd
been found across multiple species the
question became how do they work what is
it they work and remember Jared's famous
idea that they worked through the
conversion of one chemical to another so
what was the structure of the gene or is
a function of a gene and as far as the
structure goes this is that this is
famous photograph 51 and rosalind
Franklin looking down her microscope
working through
the night trying to find progressively
getting closer and closer to finding the
double helix structure of DNA and Watson
and and and Crick there has been a KERS
and a curse written about how and what
they how they found that the data but
nonetheless to be correct to correctly
attribute the idea that they were able
to create up the first model of DNA and
this is them on that day when they
finish their model in Cambridge you know
in a room working with pieces of tin and
metal creating the first double helix
model of DNA and this of course has now
become the great classic of a structure
that is so familiar to all of us that
has become a kind of meme in in in in
the audience you I often hear words like
you know this was written into the DNA
of their politics etcetera so much so
that again that essentializing quality
of the gene that it determines you
determines something has become now a a
public meme work between for about a
decade between 1950 and 1960 laid down
the foundation of an idea that a gene
works by creating a message and that
message ultimately is is translated into
form and function usually through a
protein this is a nice picture that I
got from Sydney Brenner who
unfortunately passed away of him having
an argument with with with Watson I what
I like about it is that the form and
function of these two people are very
different and and they they illustrate
how a very very similar genomes you know
they probably share ninety-nine point
some percent of their genome and yet are
yet are and were very very different
people I was very fond I'm very fond of
Sydney so that is a separate separate
sweet memory so anyway in other words
and this corresponding to particular
chemicals DNA
giving rise to an RNA and an RNA giving
rise RNA and proteins mostly proteins
but also RNA giving rise to the form and
function and and of organisms this is
something that is very special to the
NIH I have gotten to know Marshall
ehrenburg's wife very well and her son
Jonathan Weissman who is a very
prominent scientist and a great
collaborator of mine but this is from
her archives there if you go to their
house in New York Myrna Weisman very
prominent psychologist in her own right
has a copy of of this original document
this is the document where you see
Marshall basically writing on one hand
you know uua and then ascribing the
amino acid to it based on chemistry and
you can see him erasing some and then
rewriting them on top of it cutting him
out and figuring out basically what the
genetic code is it's a very precious
document there's a copy of it here I
know and there's a copy of it there's
one another copy of it in Mona's house
and this of course was a an astonishing
breakthrough from the foot for everyone
but a particularly astonishing
breakthrough for the United because no
one knew who Marshall nirenberg was he
arrived at a conference in the Soviet
Union and essentially announced that
he'd solved the genetic code and the the
the famous story goes that people had to
pause the conference and to figure out
who he was where was he coming from
obviously a young man and he would be
later awarded the Nobel Prize for it for
this so in other words this idea of
information flow and biology will come
back to the idea of information was
established by the 1950s and 1960s then
we come to the the the more contemporary
period which is that now that the basic
mechanism had been ascribed we come to
the period of in which we ascribe
meaning to the mechanism so what is the
what is the meaning behind this how do
you how do you take
this mechanism and how do you derive
meaning and by meaning I mean how what
is the actual form what is the actual
functioning of the organism and that
period begins loosely in the 1970s and
gose brings us up to 2001 and I've
called this in the book the reading and
writing of genetic information and by
reading and writing I mean by reading I
mean deciphering first of all what is
the actual sequence of genetic
information in an organism such as a
human being and by writing I refer to
the fact that that can we begin to
change that information in any
fundamental way introduce it into new
organisms combine or recombine ideas
between genes between one organism and
the end the other this is Fred Sanger
you can't give this talk without at this
Institute I think without talking about
either Marshall or Fred Fred also said
several times in his life that he
basically wrote two papers in one paper
he solved the structure of insulin and
the second paper he solved the structure
or learned to sequence the sequence of
DNA he won a Nobel Prize for one he won
a Nobel Prize for the second and so if
you have to write a few papers just just
you know just make them make them good
ones but of course as this work
proceeded on one hand we were reading
DNA in very simple forms the first
papers often read stretches of 100 200
300 letters of DNA at one point of time
the largest was the sequence of a virus
which was around 5,000 odd and this was
considered a major breakthrough leader
the capacity to read the entire sequence
of a virus genetic sequence of virus was
considered a major breakthrough but at
the same time the idea began to occur
but what if since the genetic code is
basically Universal shared all the way
through evolutionary history what if we
could take genes and not just read them
like Sanger did but actually write
genetic information and sense combine
recombine them just as you recombine or
combine words comp or big words and I
would describe this very broadly
speaking as
if if you imagine a single human beings
genetic encyclopedia if it was written
in standard letter format it would be
about 70 full volumes of the
Encyclopedia Britannica I sat in one day
and calculated it out so 70 foot full
volume within Second Treatise in other
words Eric's genome would be would cover
this entire auditorium right second and
and so the first attempts were
extraordinarily crude in terms of
rewriting that information it would be
akin toward analogous to taking six
volumes from one of these encyclopedias
and eight volumes from another slamming
them together and creating a new piece
of genetic information or a new library
as you will and this is her boy and
starting with importantly creating the
first recombinant DNA you could actually
see in this in this in this in this
picture what you still really draw in
your laboratory a plasmid broken up
somehow opened up and then a piece
inserted inside that plasmid thereby
creating a new new DNA molecule but that
already brought together fears this was
a project that was widely publicly
discussed my mentor at Stanford Paul
Berg was one of the co discoverers of
this process he also found a mechanism
basically to take two pieces of DNA from
different organisms and stitch them
together to form a new recombinant form
of DNA but that idea brought create a
public outpouring of anxiety they were
right there were students in Cambridge
who were organizing riots this was
during a conference this I think is
watered Gilbert's sitting over here and
someone running up to the podium with
this idea that we will create the
perfect race going back to this idea of
the fear of of you know now that we
could put genes together in combination
previously unknown would be be able to
manipulate the human genome now the idea
for most scientists was so far-fetched
it at that point of time and you talked
to Paul I have a long interview that I
did with Paul around this that that the
idea was so far-fetched that they
basically concentrated on biosafety most
of the concerns were not you know will
we change the human race
most of the concerns were you know what
if you flush down your sink a piece of
DNA containing a piece of the herpes
virus and some an e coli someone wrote
to Paul I have a copy of the letter
someone wrote appalled saying I would
like to introduce a cancer-causing gene
into the e coli into an e coli base
plasmid and would you could you please
give me permission to you know have the
enzymes from your laboratory and Paul
wrote back and said you know probably
just wait a little bit because we you
know putting a cancer-causing gene
inside the bacterium that lives in your
stomach probably not a good idea
etc so these anxieties of course grew
and grew leading to this place this
conference this is the famous Asilomar
conference which is really Asilomar to
the second Asilomar conference and this
is a room I actually had the privilege
of going with Paul to Asilomar as an
undergraduate student and and and it was
kind of a wonderful it was a visual tour
of modern genetics you know he would say
that room is where the journalists
fought with each other and here is where
we stayed up all night eating Chinese
food
and trying to write the first the first
ideas of how should we drag you how
should we regulate all of this and and
the proposed regulation was to have an
open conference this was also a radical
idea that he would have an open
conference and that open conference
would address how to safely combine
genes and again the the emphasis very
much was not on human genetic
manipulation but on biosafety how can we
keep this safe and how can we slowly
open up the gears such that these can be
manipulated but
that idea of safety continued and became
more and more clear but on the other
hand forces were already congealing to
start asking the question well these are
you know ideas in in other organisms
what about the human genome what where
is what what genes cause diseases in
humans how many genes do we have what do
they do how did how its variation in
this this is Nancy Wexler with a child
having Huntington's disease this is one
of her early maps and Nancy was among
the first to begin to systematically
take families with this deadly disease
that ran in her own family her her
mother would die from it her uncle's
would die from it and systematically
mapping them and she was among the first
to produce ultimately after several
years to find the actual culprit gene
now called the Huntington's gene or it
produces a an abnormal signal which
ultimately causes neurodegeneration and
Nancy among others Francis Collins among
others began to really imagine think
about the capacity or the possibility of
sequencing not just one gene at a time
or mapping one gene at a time but
mapping the whole shabang or the whole
genome and there were proponents and
opponents of this this is a story that's
been told many times watch the
documentary you'll see craig Venter
saying how he thought of it first you'll
see john sulston talking about how he
thought of it first and and this was a
public private debate covered in every
national newspaper with every potential
angle given to it and i think we tried
to be fair to do it to everyone which is
difficult to do but nonetheless the the
achievement was an important achievement
which was the sequence of the draft
sequence after of the human genome which
was finally revealed in 2001 and should
be obviously said that this is one of
the great landmark moments in the in
human history
III I'm often asked to make a
distinction it's an important
distinction between the success of the
human genome project and the Apollo and
the Manhattan
objects and I think it's an important
thing to convey to the public as an idea
and we tried to do this in the film but
I've tried to write about a writer to
write more about it at the Apollo
project and the Manhattan Project were
question-answering projects they
answered questions in other words could
you take an atom and create a bomb split
an atom and create a bomb out of it and
the answer was yes it generated a few
questions but basically it was a
hypothesis ceiling effort the Manhattan
sorry the Apollo project that was a
Manhattan Project the Apollo project was
also a hypothesis in Project can you
land a human being on the moon the human
genome project is not a hypothesis
ceiling project it is a hypothesis
generating project and therefore it's a
fundamentally different project from the
Apollo in the Manhattan Project so the
public's expectations that oh gosh what
will come out of it what what questions
did we learn to answer well certainly we
learned to answer some questions how
many genes in human beings have what
structure were they organized at which
ones map want took major diseases etc
but the real purpose as far as a cancer
biologist is concerned was to generate
questions and the questions were very
many important ones well one question
what would we learned well we learned
that genes are more like recipes than
than blueprints in other words it is not
genes that determine ultimate
autonomously most common features in
human beings are the products of genes
and environments in chance and triggers
there are some Huntington disease being
one of them where the gene is so
autonomous that it by itself can be a
powerful determinant of fate those are
generally rare more common are ones that
I've just described where multiplicities
of genes interact with environments and
chance and therefore that old idea that
genes are you and your genes and these
two have a one-to-one relationship is
true for a very minor few genetic
determinants but it's not true for many
many others and of course it told us a
lot about variation and constancy in the
genome I take a brief aside to talk
about cancer this is not a talk about
cancer but in cancer we learned a lot
from the gene for harm the human genome
project the can't human genome project
led of course
the very equally famous Cancer Genome
Atlas that TCGA and began to describe
basically how cancers differ from each
other again to go through very quickly
these slides the idea that a single
three single examples of can of a
particular cancer in this case let's say
breast cancer if you have the genome of
this cancer sort of like a snake from
the first to the last going across a
piece of paper then you'd have a certain
set of mutations in this woman another
woman who'd breast cancer might a
different spectrum of mutations a third
woman with breast cancer we might have
yet a different spectrum of mutations
some are shared some are common and you
could get maps that look like this and
one of the major victories of this has
been to address particularly particular
targets inside the in these aberrant
genes and cancer where you can block
them with small molecules such as
Gleevec in this case or antibodies such
as Herceptin in this case these have
been I would say seminal successes but
also sobering successes in many cases we
found like medicines that are determined
by genetic aberrations in cancer cells
have had remarkable successes in cancer
Herceptin is a clearly a remarkable
example of them Gleevec is a remarkable
example of it last week there was an
astonishing new discovery along Jenica
trial which showed that about twenty to
thirty percent of patients with ovarian
cancer who have defects in in in DNA
repair are profoundly helped by a new
series of drugs called PARP inhibitors
some of them actually reaching five year
survival six year survivals after having
advanced ovarian cancer so another
seminal success within cancer but these
have been I would say seminal successes
but not universal across the field there
are many cancers that remain
recalcitrant to to to treatment I want
to spend the last few minutes five
minutes now talking about the future and
and here is here is where we are this
slide was made a long time ago this is
of course
Jessica yells injure the famous case
this is a child who had a genetic
disease that genetic disease he was
photographed here just before he went to
have gene therapy for this genetic
disease and as many of you know he
became the first victim of gene therapy
his his body had a severe reaction
probably an immune reaction to the gene
therapy vector the virus that was used
and he died as a consequence of that
this brought an incredible new level of
scrutiny and a kind of deep freeze on
the field and what we are experiencing
now we're experiencing today is a is a
is the thaw of that freeze it took about
ten or years for for that field to begin
to thaw but last week and the week
before that and the week two weeks
before that and probably a year before
that we've seen we began to see truly
successful transformative gene therapy
trials in diseases such as sickle cell
anemia factor diff clotting factor
deficiencies and other diseases which
are now becoming not just rare diseases
but in fact are common diseases and so
two things are happening now which now
re-raise again the capacity of all the
questions about what happens in the
future one is that we have now begun to
ascribe and read risk in a way that we
hadn't read and ascribed before because
computational power has been applied to
this encyclopedia and these complex
human traits which were previously
hidden or previously very difficult to
find or scrutinized have become
progressively amenable to becoming
understood using computational
techniques so one good example is human
height for decades we knew that human
height was had a genetic component to it
tall parents tend to produce tall
children and short parents 10 degrees
short children but we had no idea about
which genes what were the actual genes
that controlled height how many were
they and and what their identities were
but we are now progressively beginning
to take complex human traits such as
height
also risk of obesity risk of breast
cancer risk of cardiovascular disease
and ascribe real risk to individuals to
their individual genomes based on on
genetic information alone and virtually
all of all of you know here that we are
also inventing tools at the same time
where you can not just read the genome
but write the genome and by that I mean
not the old method or the crude method
of taking eight volumes of the
Encyclopedia and six volumes of the
Encyclopedia and slamming them together
but going into page 147 of volumes 3 etc
and changing the word this to that
there's a very famous Bible in which
there's a transcriptional error in which
rather than saying thou shalt not commit
adultery it says thou shalt commit
adultery and so it's called the wicked
Bible and it of course changes the
meaning of of the sentence completely
and therefore we are beginning to ask
questions like to what extent should we
be changing these meanings how will it
impact medicine water the cuts impacts
for culture and society and what
boundaries will be drawn I want to
finish
to some extent by talking about some
something that I talked about in the
book but now has become very much a
center of the conversation which is
under what circumstances should be
allowed genes to be altered in the germ
line and many many people have this has
been a huge public debate it remains a
public debate because of course we are
now talking about the possibility of
taking this information this
extraordinary information in our own
hands the first thing and people often
have asked me in their in the wake of
the book what are your recommendations
well my recommendations always have have
really four central ideas and I want to
end with these four ideas the first is
we need to be cognizant of the history
we need to read the stories and the
seductions of positive eugenics and
negative eugenics before we even begin
this conversation because this
conversation is an old one it is not a
new one and the desires the tools might
be new but the desires are old
and combination of old desires and new
tools create inevitably create ethical
questions that require deep thinking
about history and that's why we need to
read them the second is is is something
that I proposed in the book but it
requires some some deep consideration
and that is that virtually every time
this has been considered whether we
should make alterations in human genomes
in the germline it begins the
conversations begins with this idea of
extraordinary suffering that that that
we if we are to do this at all to
intervene that we must be able to define
these condition this cannot be a trivial
pursuit it has to involve extraordinary
suffering and many of you know that the
most recent attempts to do this in China
for instance actually failed in this
even fundamental criteria we can we'll
talk about it a little bit more perhaps
afterwards but they did not involve a
disease of extraordinary suffering the
second is this idea that I've been
talking about over and over again
penetrance or determinism that that we
when we begin this conversation we begin
the conversation by reminding ourselves
that for most genes this the the depth
of penetrates the idea that the gene
determines you and the you determine the
gene is not is not a hundred percent is
far from the case and so that we should
have some real confidence that these
things are linked together and finally
the idea that that the the fetus does
not speak the fetus has no voice and
therefore there are only two voices that
speak for the fetus right so one voice
is the voice of the parents and the
other voice is the voice of society and
the public and that these two voices
need to speak for the fetus and with the
fetus to ensure that the fetus has the
freedom and choice that we expected that
we expect for ourselves and as long as
to some extent we stay within these
realms I think I think there will be
increasing comfort with with altering
human genes in the human genome but as
we depart from them as was the case in
most recent times in China I think we
will become uncomfortable and we will
begin to have to impose the kind of
moratoria that were in
posed on early early aspects of gene
therapy so I will stop here there was
kind of a kind of historic journey
raising questions about what might
happen in the future and proposing some
solutions about how we might imagine
altering the altering the human genome
should we be given the capacity to do so
in the near future thank you thank you
very much
[Applause]
hello Tesco there we go um so with the
remaining time we have I'm happy to ask
questions I have lots of things I want
to ask but I'm also cognizant that
there's a lot of people here who might
be interested in well so if I see people
queuing up at the mics I will yield time
to them they have questions for Sid
otherwise I'll I'll use the remaining
time for my questions so it's your
choice but if you're interested please
go to the microphone so that was great
one of the things I have always wanted
to ask you but especially here you spell
out this really makes me even more
interested is did you always want to I
mean writing a book is just must be an
immense amount of work was that
something that you aspire to early was
it your professional training was that
your work as a physician where did that
sort of really come together you know
that desire that desire really emerged
from to two very different arenas one
was very early on when I was interacting
with Paul Berg in at Stanford as an
undergraduate and it was very clear that
Paul was not only considering the
scientific questions and the technical
questions that were very obviously very
deep but also had to wrestle with the
ethical questions in his case as I said
mostly biosafety questions but questions
that his students would ask him and what
about me to control human fate by
altering genes so the idea of public
discourse was very much in part of the
laboratory it was not external to the
laboratory it was spoken about very
often that thought was sort of buried
while I finished my PhD and my my my
early medical work but by the time I
became a cancer physician that thought
re-emerged because cancer is obviously
so central to public discourse why you
know where are we now in the so-called
war on cancer what is happening next
patients ask me this question and I
began to really think seriously about
sort of writing a response to it and
astonishingly there was in the book so
you
I think of myself as sort of very
fundamentally a kind of problem driven
person I like I like I like to think of
problems and then I like to think of how
to solve those problems and this was a
problem that science wasn't solving in
other words there was no mat or journey
that told the vast public where we were
in the war and what was happening next
and if it was and the solution was not
scientific it had to be a book so did a
similar sort of thread begin around
again very similar around jeans and you
know this you know this was so once I
finished the Emperor of all maladies two
or three things began to happen one was
of course we were beginning to do we
were beginning to understand complex
human genetic information at a level
that we hadn't understood before
sequencing had become legion you could
get a human genome the exome sequence
set a thousand dollars public you know
and you could turn on your television
and you see an advertisement from
23andme or something to have your genome
sequenced
the second thing was that gene therapy
was throwing as an idea so medically
speaking these I the idea that you could
use genetic medicine not only to
diagnose but potentially to treat I was
beginning to happen and then in the
middle of all of it CRISPR and its tools
synthetic DNA also came around so all of
a sudden these three ideas began to
coalesce into a kind of book in my mind
look this book is very much about the
future me and primarily is somewhat
about the possible so I so so this book
is very much about the second book is
very much about now that we have these
tools what should we do with them so is
there a third book being cooked up or
not yet yeah I'm in the middle of a
third book I mean I had imagined a kind
of triad or a quartet I'm trying to
write a book which I'm still trying to
wrestle around
and if you have any help email me I
thought that one should write or one
should tell the story of cell biology
but tell that story in a way in a
slightly different way not in this kind
of 600 page story of cell value he
discovered this she discovered that she
then found this he didn't found that but
tell tell us how cell biology
fundamentally transformed medicine that
understanding human beings as Anna
Kalyani writing a lot about this in the
new yorker in car t cell library some
party cells i release on on
microenvironments wrote a piece on early
diagnostics all blah but these are all
intended these are my ways and exploring
the same idea how did this idea that we
are assemblages or Ecology's of cells
how did that transform medicine and how
will it transform medicine in the future
starting from immunotherapy so by the
way there are for those who are standing
back there are seats in front there feel
free to come on down and not get kicked
out so there are seats in front feel
free to come down why don't we take I
see people queued up at the microphone
Elaine what you've been what you've been
speaking about but as much press as the
SMA results God an equal amount of press
was devoted to the cost obviously of the
therapy which was beyond astronomical so
as a person who has a very loud voice
spanning several communities in health
care that everyone from the general
public to pharmaceuticals news media to
patient advocacy groups I mean they're
all interested in what you have to say
do you do you sort of feel an obligation
to jump into that dialogue I have I mean
particularly in cancer medicine
obviously this is closer to me than
genetic medicine side but I appreciate
that the principles that apply to want
to fly to the other I think it's quite
fair to say that the pendulum has swung
towards costs that are asked
I mean I recently wrote a piece about
this Kim Raya and yes Carter to karti
drugs also by the ranging therapy's
fundamentally cost $375,000 for the
$173,000 for the other so astronomical
numbers I think that I think the
pendulum has clearly swung in the
direction part of it I hope I hope is
the youth of the science in the sense
that when discoveries are made that are
very young in a particular science the
risks that are taken are very deep and
enormous and there's a there's a there's
a disproportionality in and in the
attempt to recover that risk so I think
that disproportionately will slowly fall
apart we will slowly identify hopefully
patients who are likely to respond
versus patients who are not like respond
and to be fair patients who are likely
to respond to a drug like a Carty
therapy yes card a b-cell for b-cell a
aloud if you do even standard economic
analysis a transplant which will undergo
200 otherwise cost 250 to 300 thousand
dollars so if there's truly a curative
therapy I think there is a price point a
high price point that can be paid for
these therapies because they are
transformative but I think we're in the
early days I think we're far away from
that price point we are in the millions
which are not affordable not affordable
by individuals certainly but also not
affordable by health care systems if if
you know if if one had to pay for this
in you know single insurance pool that
insurance will be would be distorted by
Musa nursin we've seen that actually I
analyzed recently a relatively small
insurance company not small three
hundred thousand four thousand patients
and basically within one of these one of
their sub tools was a patient with SMA
getting news Anderson it was Joe it
totally distorted the entire cost of
that pool so these are extraordinarily
important consequences I think we're
early in the field young in the field
gene therapy will start out expensive
and the whole
is that as we learn more technologically
about it the cost will come down so
we'll try to get in these five talked
are these five questions but try to make
the questions brief and we'll just keep
it moving Caroline I had a longer
question so we're a pretty focused
audience here right we all work at the
genome Institute and one of the things I
think must be really interesting from
your perspective is you have a book and
go on book tour isn't all of that as you
get you know sort of is Elena saying a
wide swath of the world sort of
interacting with you and I guess are
there things that have really surprised
you or particular things when you've
talked to less scientifically oriented
communities that have really stood out
to you and how people have reacted to
your work I think the most surprising
thing is has been the revival of genetic
determinism in the world the revival of
the idea that which was which mean
somewhat hushed for a while the revival
of the idea among many people across
political spectrum many people the
extent to which you are the product of
your genes and the genes your genes are
what we are what is driving your fate
your choices etc and it was it is
important to convey that in certain
instances that idea is true there's a
truth to that idea but they're rare
generally rare instances and there's
certain interesting instances of the
ideas completely not true and there
usually I would say rare instances as
well and that the reality lies somewhere
in between and that uncertainty rather
than being something that we're
frightened of is cause for celebration
it makes us different it makes life work
full of surprises and you want a life of
surprises you do not want a life in
which your genes determine you like
sadly a patient with Huntington's
disease you do not want that life nor do
perhaps want a life in which you have as
I said where heredity loses meaning for
you because if it's carry meaning for us
for centuries millennia tens of
thousands of thousands of years against
so so somewhere in between is is I think
the joy of
human variation in diversity plus yeah I
want to follow up on your observation
about hypothesis testing versus
hypothesis generating yes most of us who
are clinically trained were mercilessly
criticised if we dared to order a test
on a patient and didn't know in advance
how the result would change our
management it would seem that a genome a
clinical genome is somewhat disruptive
to that sort of tenets and philosophy
and medicine and be interested to hear
your thoughts about how that's going to
play out well I think it works best if
if we make that information anonymous
and put it in a bio bank because
individual genomes as you know have
don't really have the power or the
computational capacity to give us real
information about complex diseases they
can about simple diseases but complex
diseases and this is where I think we
have to encourage I think rather than
having private projects to have national
projects such as the UK biobank make
them available make them publicly
available I know there's a biobank
effort here to make them publicly
available make them public you little
veil about the computer scientists who
may have a totally different set of
skills then this audience or their sins
Institute have and make them anonymous
such that such that they can really
begin to understand that complexity and
generate hypotheses and answer questions
so I think the idea of a clinician
ordering a test today which is
hypothesis generating has become more
acceptable but it is most useful and
most acceptable when you have a when you
have a biobank and when you collect data
because the amount of data is very
significant here all right we're gonna
just go a few minutes into overtime I
know we got to get people to lunch so
they're back here in the afternoon but
we'll just take these three questions
real quick thank you first of all I
really appreciate as someone who's
working on gene therapy the perspective
and
and inspiration that your talk today and
your books have given me person I'm sure
a lot of people there's one moment in
the video today where Jason's mom said
that the therapy was was amazing but it
was also very normal and going back to
your discussion of gene therapy and
where the limits might be and I
appreciate that you've kept this
discussion so we're very unmad ik and
not overly prescriptive but I wonder if
you could talk about whether there are
things that you think should be rebuilt
in there off limits
well I think the things that I talked
about this I really think that as long
as we remain within this triangle as
long as we try to really get a sense
cultural sense social social sense of
what suffering is I mean the centerpiece
of all of this I'm a physician so the
centerpiece of all of this is to me
suffering and and and for instance it is
not enhancement it is it is very much
about emancipation from suffering I
think if we keep that as our compass as
it were then the moral compass is set
right I don't know where the future
generations will will change that
whether there will be new ideas about
what suffering is and what the mild even
mild forms of suffering may be amenable
to various one book of genetics but as
long as we we keep that compass I think
we think I think we're in a safe place I
kind of wanted to follow up on that your
comment and specifically on the freedom
and choice in the triangle the role of
freedom and choice in a brave new world
when we'll bring the concept of heredity
the possibility of transmitting changes
being produced in the germline gene and
journal on genomes transmitting them to
the next generation do you think that
changes the our understanding of the
freedom and choice and would you care to
prognosticate were do you think those
discussions going to take us the
recursive questions which is what if we
change the genes that allow us to think
about choice well that would be
well that would be like Francis
Fukuyama's our Pollino it's an
extraordinarily difficult question right
because as I said but my question is
slightly different actually okay my
question is more about and we think
about freedom as you know freedom to
operate and do what I feel is you know
will produce most happiness for me think
about it as a form of art let's say but
when we start talking about technology
that change is not just myself but can
affect future generations how do you
think we need to define why I think we
don't know I think we there is no metric
by which we can account for unspoken
voices I mean this this was you know
this this argument has been made this
was a historic argument made by people
like mill and the utilitarians old
philosophical argument because you
cannot account for unspoken voices in
the future and so there must be some way
of discounting for them it's a great
economics problem by the way how do you
discount for future generations I don't
know the answer to that question as I
said my moral compass all that we know
practically speaking is that they're
really two voices because the fetus's
voice is unknown practically speaking
they're only two voices that are
speaking for or against gene therapy or
gene alteration in the Vedas one of them
is the parents and they have the most
power and the other one is society at
large that recourse that surrounds that
surrounds us and if these two voices
were to make a decision in one direction
or the other I think it'd be very tough
and if there was extraordinary suffering
involved I think will be very tough to
prevent it I think you'd be hard-pressed
not to do it
Christine you get the last word okay so
being Thanksgiving weekend not allowed
to talk about religion or politics and
being a federal employee and being
completely agnostic and things I could
have granted having no opinions in this
time of malleable facts when you write
books and you propose this that the
fetus's opinion should be considered are
there instances this is it's provocative
what it potentially gives even if you're
not dogmatic or agnostic fodder to
different sides have you seen examples
of your work being taken out of a
context in which you don't appreciate it
are there ways to write it and prevent
that both of them I mean you know and
it's it's a danger that you have to
involve yourself in as if you have if
you're if you choose to write if you
choose to write and you every every time
I write something there is something
that I don't agree with which is written
about my own work so my general response
is not respond to them but to have it
played out as it were in the public
realm but you're absolutely right in
this time of malleable information
information is distorted and an altered
I'll just give you one example to finish
up I have very strong feelings very
strong strong thoughts about the misuse
historical misuse of terms like IQ I
don't have a problem with the test I
just had the one with the name of the
test I think it should be called
something else it should be called
adaptability to certain forms of
abstract problem-solving a RR P P P and
there people have it drives people mad
that if you if you say this because they
believe that word they believe it exists
but most importantly they believe that
the word intelligence should be used in
this right so and no matter what I say
it say well sure there's a hereditary
component to it we know this store
there's you know there's one component
that component to instant to share some
component bla bla bla nothing satisfies
in except for I keep saying that is not
my argument you don't understand I just
want to change the name because it
signifies the cultural significance that
out lies its real value I keep saying
this over and over again but no one will
ever listen and the best example of this
was a terrible review of the gene in a
very conservative English newspaper
except it had the nicest that the icing
on the cake was was very very sweet
because the cover of this method they're
very conservative English newspaper
publishers review of this book very
critical about this IQ business didn't
talk anything that
nothing to do with the book for the most
part but they put a picture of
left-handed DNA on the cover and so I
just said nothing except I wrote them a
letter and saying if you're gonna
publish a review which focuses on
genetics and DNA try to get the picture
right Thanks
so first of all thank you this was
phenomenal is exactly what water for
today I mean I know you have things like
Pulitzer Prize and things like that but
I we wanted to give you some more
interesting to put into your office you
could just put the Pulitzer somewhere
else and you get out this beautiful
little commemorative thing and I'm sure
you have more important things on your
wall take those down put this up
[Applause]
you